Decision Template
=================

Background
----------

The background section should contain the background information needed for
understanding what is being decided.
This is not supposed to be a burden to write or read, 1-2 paragraphs should be
enough.

If the decision changes the way we do something, please mention this here and
describe the current way either here or in the "Other options" section.

Example:

    We are writing decision documents for each decision that we want to record.
    These live in the `desing-decisions` directory, using file names with
    the `yyyy-mm-dd-<dash-separated-title>.md` format, with the date
    being roughly the date when the decision was made.

    Currently (2018-09-19) the document format is unrestricted, but loosely
    follows the template in this file.

Problem/Questions
-----------------

What is/are the issue(s) on which we need a decision? Consider adding examples,
either here or in a separate section. Consider separating multiple issues
in multiple documents.

Example:

    Should we follow a template when writing decision documents?

Decision: Decision title 1
--------------------------

If there is only one decision (which should usually be the case), having
just "Decision" as the section title is reasonable.

Example:

    We should consider the current template as a strong suggestion, without
    being forced to follow it when it does not make sense.

Decision: Decision title 2
--------------------------

Multiple decisions, by default, should be separated in multiple sections, each
having hints in its title about what is being decided

Reasoning/Other options considered
----------------------------------

Why did we decide the way we did? What other options were considered?

Other useful information.
Examples:
* This was a top-down decision, please ask `<someone>` for details
* See this Slack thread for the discussion that lead to this decision
  (but this should not be used instead of listing the actual reasons here).

This section may be missing, but, by default, please add information here. It
will help all future readers understand the decision and it will prevent people
from rejecting it and re-deciding on something worse.

Example:

    The proposed structure makes the documents easier to read: one can quickly
    identify the issue and the decisions around it. People can easily
    refresh their background knowledge. When someone asks "why?",
    or someone wants to have a better decision, they can read the "reasoning"
    section.

    The template is strongly suggested because it is expected that most
    decisions will have some background, some issue(s) that need to be decided,
    some actual decisions and some reasoning behind them. However, the
    "Reasoning" section may need to be structured differently, other sections
    may be needed (e.g. an examples one) and, in general, if something else
    makes sense, then it makes sense.

    The other option considered was to not use a template and to point out
    possible improvements in code reviews. Since people loosely followed this
    template anyway, the current decision does not change the end result much,
    and it makes the code reviews focus on the important stuff. It also
    makes it less likely that people don't forget to include
    important/useful things in decision documents.

