Side conditions for predicates
==============================

Background
----------

Let us say that we have a `sgn` function defined in the usual way:
```
sgn(x) = -1 requires x < 0
sgn(x) = 0 requires x == 0
sgn(x) = 1 requires x > 0
```

Let us also say that we're trying to simplify this top-level configuration:
`sgn(x) and x>1`. Then it should be obvious that this evaluates uniquely to
`1 and x>1`, and we can solve that by passing the top-level condition,
`x>1`, as a side condition to the function simplifier, which can then use it
to prune the unfeasible branches.

The problem
-----------

The main question is what to use as a side condition when simplifying other
predicates in a way that makes sense. The predicate can be either the
top-level one or it could be generated by something like unification or
function application simplification.

One interesting issue is how to simplify the predicate `sgn(x)==1`.

Decision
--------

Use the top-level predicate in the short term (partly implemented in the PR
that added this document). In the long term, use the combined version below.

Options
-------

### Use the top-level predicate

Except when simplifying the top condition, we can safely use the top-level
predicate as a side condition. When simplifying the top condition we can safely
use the top condition from the previous rewrite step
(before the first step we can just use `⊤`).
This would allow us to simplify many predicates, but would fail for `sgn(x)==1`.

### Conditions as their own side conditions

We could try to use a condition as its own side-condition.

The intuition would be that, when simplifying the `sgn(x)` part from
`sgn(x)==1 and x>1` the SMT can use `x>1` to prune all branches except one.
When simplifying `sgn(x)==1`, the SMT may again prune all branches except one
(assuming that it has the definition for `sgn`).

The main problem is that the side condition cannot be used to prune unneeded
predicates, which seems to be a priority right now. Normally, if the top-level
predicate is `x>1` and we evaluate `sgn(x)` to `1 and x>0`, then, since `x>1`
implies `x>0`, we can safely drop `x>0` from the evaluation result and keep
only the `1` part.

However, if we try that when evaluating `sgn(x)==1` with itself as a side
condition, say, because `sgn(x)==1` is the top predicate, we would get just
`⊤` (since `sgn(x)==1` implies `x>0` and we'll drop it), which is obviously
wrong.

### Combining the two

We could do a two-step simplification (not implemented at the time
when this document is being written). Let's say `C` is the top-level condition
(as mentioned above, when evaluating the current top-level condition, `C` is either the top level condition from the
previous rewrite step or `⊤`).
Then we do this:

1. Let us say that a sub-term `σ` of a predicate `P` yields
   `σ = φ₁ ∨ ... ∨ φₙ`.
1. We filter the resulting disjunction by evaluating `φᵢ` under the condition
   `C ∧ P ∧ (σ = φᵢ)`. See Example 2 below.
    1. In the usual case, `σ` is a function-like pattern, and at most one of
       `φᵢ` is defined. Note that this is not always the case, since evaluating
       `sgn(x)` as part of `ceil(1/sgn(x))` with a `⊤` top-level condition
       will still branch.
1. Assuming that only one `φᵢ` is defined, we can sometimes simplify its
   condition by using `C`, i.e. if `φᵢ = tᵢ ∧ Rᵢ` with `Rᵢ` being a predicate,
   and `C` implies `Rᵢ`, then we can simply drop `Rᵢ`).

Additionally, a predicate `P` can be written as `P = P₁ ∧ ... ∧ Pₙ`, usually
with `n>1`. Then we can simplify it as follows (see Example 1 below):
1. We simplify `P₁` as described above, but in the last step we check whether
   `C ∧ P₂ ... ∧ Pₙ` implies `Rᵢ`. Let `Q₁` be the result.
1. We simplify `P₂` as above, in the last step we check whether
   `C ∧ Q₁ ∧ P₃ ... ∧ Pₙ` implies `Rᵢ`. Let `Q₂` be the result.
1. In general, we simplify `Pⱼ` as above, in the last step we check
   whether `C ∧ Q₁ ∧ ... ∧ Qⱼ₋₁ ∧ Pⱼ₊₁ ... ∧ Pₙ` implies `Rᵢ`.
   Let `Qⱼ` be the result.

Note that when simplifying `Pⱼ` we can't just take all `Pₖ` except `Pⱼ` as a
side predicate in the last step since we don't want to simplify
`sgn(x)==1 ∧ x>0` to `⊤` (see Example 1 below).

#### Example 1

Let's say that the SMT solver understands `sgn` and `abs` and we simplify
`sgn(x)==0 ∧ abs(x)==0`, i.e. `P₁ = sgn(x)==0` and `P₂ = abs(x)==0`.

First we evaluate `sgn(x)` to `0 ∧ x==0` (we prune the other branches),
we see that `abs(x)==0` implies `x==0`, so we simplify `sgn(x)` to `0`,
and we simplify `P = sgn(x)==0` to `⊤`, so `Q₁ = ⊤`.

Naively, we would continue to evaluate `abs(x)` with `P₁`, i.e. `sgn(x)==0`
as a side condition. It would evaluate to `0 ∧ x==0`, we would see that
`sgn(x)==0` implies `x==0`, so we drop that, simplifying `abs(x)` to `0`,
and `abs(x)==0` to `⊤`, which means we just simplified the entire predicate
to `⊤`.

However, if we use the simplified version of `sgn(x)==0`, `Q₁`, i.e. `⊤`,
then we get the right answer. We evaluate `abs(x)` to `0 ∧ x==0`
(pruning branches as described in Example 2), then we evaluate
`abs(x)==0` to `x==0`. Then we have `Q₂ = x==0` and we simplify the entire
predicate to `x==0`.

#### Example 2

Say `C = ⊤` and we want to evaluate `P`, which is `sgn(x)==1`.
Let's also say that we don't have a definition for `sgn` which is suitable for
the SMT solver.

We have three branches: `sgn(x)==1 and x>0`, `sgn(x)==-1 and x<0` and
`sgn(x)==0 and x==0`. Obviously, we want the first branch, but, by default, we
have no way of selecting it.

If we just evaluate `⊤ ∧ sgn(x)==1 ∧ x<0`, the SMT solver will not be able
to reject it. But it should be safe to evaluate
`⊤ ∧ sgn(x)==1 ∧ sgn(x)==-1 ∧ x<0`, and that should be good enough.
