Unification (new)
=================

This document attempts to describe the proposed new unification algorithm. This
is divided into two sections: the algorithm itself, and an appendix how to
unify various types of terms. 

The algorithm is fairly straightforward: we construct a priority queue of pairs
of terms representing subterms to be unified. The queue is initialized with the
two top-level terms. We then repeatedly pop pairs of terms from the priority
queue and process them. Each pair can result in one of five actions:

1. *Discharge* the pair if unification of these two terms succeeds
   unconditionally.
2. *Fail* the entire unification procedure if these two terms do not unify.
3. *Bind* a variable to a term.
4. *Decompose* the terms into one or more new pairs, adding them to the
   priority queue.
5. *Add a constraint* in the event that unification can only be solved
   partially.
6. *Add an AC equation* in the event that AC unification is required.
7. *Fork* the unification procedure if multiple distinct cases ought to be
   examined in parallel.

Obviously because of *bind* and *constraint* operations, we must maintain a map
binding variable names to terms and a list of constraints. The unifier also
operates within a LogicT monad transformer in order to handle the *fork* case.

After the priority queue is empty, we still need to solve the AC subproblems.
This process is described in the Map section below. We solve each subproblem
individually, which yields a disjunction of substitutions. However, when we
have a solution for the free theory (i.e., the subproblem which consists of
non-AC symbols), and a solution for each subproblem, we still need to combine
them into a solution to the problem as a whole. We then use the theory
combination algorithm (described below) to combine the AC solutions with the
solutions for the free theory. This combination algorithm may introduce new
equalities that need to be added to the priority queue, so we return to the
previous step.

Once we have no equalities in the priority queue and no AC subproblems to
solve, if we did not fail anywhere, we are left with a final substitution,
which contains both variables from the original terms being unified, and
variables generated by AC unification. We substitute the bindings for the AC
variables into the rest of the substitution, and return the bindings that were
part of the original problem. This substitution then gets normalized, and the
resulting normal substitution is the solution to unification. Note that we
discuss this in the context of a single solution because disjunctions and
multiple solutions are handled implicitly by the monad transformer. Each
solution can succeed or fail on its own, and if no solutions succeed,
unification fails entirely and returns \bottom.

One detail not yet discussed concerns the ordering of pairs within the priority
queue. Currently our implementation merely uses a stack. Eventually, we will
want to order the processing of unificands so that the algorithm fails as
quickly as possible on problems where it ought to fail.

Below is the appendix dealing with how to process each type of pattern, as well
as the details of theory combination.

Aliases
-------

If either pattern is an alias, expand that alias and decompose with the
expanded terms.

Top and Bottom
--------------

There are two cases; unifying an \and and unifying an \equals. In the case of
an \and, if either term is \bottom, fail. Otherwise, if either term is \top,
discharge. In the case of an \equals, if both terms are \bottom, or both terms
are \top, discharge. If one term is \top and the other is \bottom, fail.
Otherwise if one term is \bottom, attempt to simplify the \ceil of the other
term. If it simplifies to \top, fail. If it simplifies to \bottom, discharge.
Otherwise, constrain the solution with the negation of the simplified
constraint.

Other cases involving unifying \equals are handled as constraints by the
fallback case.

And and Or
----------

Here we only apply this case when unifying an \and. When unifying an \equals,
the following simplification is not sound, so we should not apply it.

However, when unifying `\and(p, q)` and `r` as an \and, decompose with two
pairs: `p, r` and `q, r`. When unifying `\or(p, q)` and `r` as an \and, fork
with two cases: decomposing with `p, r` and decomposing with `q, r`. This can
be seen to be sound via distributivity.

Constants
---------

If both terms are \dv, and are equal, discharge.
If they are unequal, fail

Variables
---------

If both terms are variables, consider the following cases:

* If both terms are the same variable A, discharge.
* Otherwise if one or both terms are bound variables bound to another variable,
  decompose with the binding of the bound variable and the other variable.
* Otherwise, both terms are either free variables or variables bound to
  non-variable patterns. If both terms are free variables, bind the lesser free
  variable to the greater free variable according to the normal order of
  variables.
* If one term is a free variable and the other is bound to a non-variable
  pattern, bind the free variable to the constructor.
* If both terms are variables bound to non-variable patterns, decompose with
  those patterns.

If one term is a variable and the other is a function-like pattern (but not a
variable), consider the following cases:

* If the variable is free, bind it to the pattern.
* If the variable is bound to a variable, bind the variable it is bound to to
  the pattern.
* If the variable is bound to a constructor, decompose with the constructor and
  the pattern.

Constructors
------------

If the first term is an injective application and the second is the same
symbol, decompose with each pair of children of each pattern.  If both terms
are different constructors or overloaded symbols, fail.

Injections
----------

If both terms are `inj`, and you are unifying `inj{s1, s}(p1)` and
`inj{s2, s}(p2)`:

* If s1 == s2, decompose with `p1` and `p2`.
* If s1 < s2, decompose with `inj{s1, s2}(p1)` and `p2`.
* If s2 < s1, symmetric of above
* otherwise, fail

If one term is `inj` and the other is a constructor, fail.

Overloading
-----------
If one term is `inj{s1, s2}(p1)` where p1 is an overloaded application, and the
other is `p2`, an overload of `p1`, or if both terms are injections applied
to overloaded constructors, or if one term is an overloaded symbol and the
other is an injection applied to a variable, or if one term is an injection
applied to an overloaded symbol and the other is an injection applied to a
variable, we handle these cases via the overload simplifier, which returns one
of three cases:

* Clash: unification fails
* Simple resolution: decompose the two terms returned by the simplifier.
* Narrowing resolution: constrain the solution with the constraint returned by
  the simplifier and decompose the terms returned.

If the preceding section does not apply, but one pattern is an injection and
the other is an overloaded symbol, fail.

Map
---

If both patterns are of a map sort, we first normalize each map by categorizing
each subterm according to one of three categories:

1. Elements (symbolic and concrete)
2. Variables (of map sort)
3. Functions (of map sort other than `.Map`, `_Map_`, and `|->`)

This process may yield the value \bottom for either map, in which case, fail.

First, we remove all subterms present in both maps from each map.

We then consider 2 cases:

1. Either map still contains functions of map sort. In this case, constrain
   with an equality between the two maps.
2. Both maps consist only of elements and variables. In this case, apply AC
   unification to the two maps.

### AC Unification 

First, we consider the following special cases:

* If both maps are empty, discharge.
* If one map has 0 elements and 1 variable, treat it as a variable pattern
  instead, and perform variable abstraction on the other pattern, then follow
the procedure for AC binding.
* If both maps have 1 element and 0 variables, decompose with the keys and
  values.
* Otherwise, if one map is empty and the other has 0 elements, bind each
  variable of the other map to the empty map.
* Otherwise, if one map is empty (and the other has elements), fail.
* Otherwise, perform variable abstraction on the elements of both maps and
  decompose with the AC equation and free equations that result.

### Variable Abstraction

Variable abstraction replaces each element in one or both map patterns with
a new fresh variable and generates a free equality equating that variable with
the element it corresponds to. After replacing all the elements in both map
patterns, what is left is an equality that consists purely of map concatenation
and variables, which is added to the AC equations to solve.

### AC Binding

If one term is a variable X and the other is `_Map_(s1, ..., sn)` where si is a
variable, we consider the following cases:

* If X is free, bind X to the other term.
* If X is bound to a variable, bind the variable it is bound to to the other
  term.
* Otherwise, add the AC equation between the binding of X and the other term to
  the AC equations to solve.

### AC Subproblems

After the priority queue is empty, we are left with one AC subproblem per map
or set sort. We then solve each one according to the following algorithm, which
returns a list of disjunct solutions:

First, we replace each variable with its binding in the substitution until this
can no longer occur.

We are left with a system of equations P == s1 = s1' /\ ... /\ sp = sp' where
each si and si' is of the form `_Map_(t1, ..., tk)` for some k > 1 where each
ti is a variable. We define u1, ..., un to be the unique variables in the
system of equations, and associate each ui an integer variable xi. We say a
variable xi is *constrained* if it came from a variable abstraction of a map
element, and *unconstrained* otherwise. We then convert P into the following
system of linear Diophantine equations:

d(u1, t1=t1')x1 + ... + d(un, t1=t1')xn = 0
.
.
.
d(u1, tp = tp')x1 + ... + d(un, tp=tp')xn = 0

Where d(ui, ti = ti') is the number of occurrences of ui in ti minus the number
of occurrences of ui in ti'.

We then compute the set of positive, non-null, minimal solutions of this system
of equations, called S, using an algorithm defined in
"Competing for the AC-Unification Race" by Alexandre Boudet. Each solution Sj
in S is one element of what we choose to call the *diophantine basis* of P.
It is called a basis because, in a mathematical sense, each solution to P
consists of some algebraic combination of the elements of the basis. For each
solution `Sj = (d1, ..., dn)` in this set, we associate a new (existentially
quantified) term variable Vj.  Each subset `{s1, ..., sq}` of S is a
*potential solution* of P. The potential solution is *suitable* if:

* It is maximal; i.e., there is not another potential solution which is a
  superset of this one which is also suitable.
* It is *legal*; a potential solution is legal if, for each constrained
  variable xi, the sum from j = 1 to q of sj(i) is equal to 1.

We then compute the set of all suitable potential solutions of P. The details
of how this is done are based on a Binary Decision Diagram and in particular
are adapted with slight details specific to K from Maude code for ACU
unification found in the `src/ACU_Theory/ACU_UnificationSubproblem2.cc` file in
the Maude repository in the `solve` function.

Each suitable potential solution becomes a solution of P in the following way:

{ui = _Map_(V1^s1(i), ..., Vq^sq(i) | i from 1 to n}

### Theory combination

Theory combination takes a list of list of substitutions (in particular, one
list of substitutions per AC sort and one substitution per solution to the AC
subproblem) and the substitution from the free theory, and combines the
solutions for each AC subproblem back into the solution for the free theory.

First, for each substitution in the list of list of substitutions, we take each
binding of a variable ui to a variable Vj, and substitute every occurrence of
Vj with ui. We then compute all the combinations of the resulting list of list
of substitutions; each possible combination of one solution from each list of
solutions becomes one solution of the combined theory. We then perform
*variable replacement* on the resulting solution.

### Variable Replacement

Variable replacement takes a solution consisting of a conjunction of solutions
for each AC sort and a solution for the free theory, and returns a list of free
equalities to decompose with, and a new free-theory substitution. It does this
by repeatedly removing *improper bindings* from the solution and processing
them, collecting free equations along the way, collecting the improper
bindings, and then creating a new free-theory substitution from combining the
improper bindings with the remaining processed solution, which is unioned
together.

An improper binding is a binding of a variable to another variable. For each
improper binding x = y, we substitute y for x everywhere in the solution and
add `x = y` to the list of improper bindings. When substituting, if we
substitute in a manner such that we are left with an equality that is between
two non-variables, we remove it from the solution and add it to the list of
free equations to decompose.

Note that there are two ways to consider an equation `x = y`, since equalities
are commutative. We could replace `x` with `y` or `y` with `x`. In practice, we
always replace `x` with `y` because we orient the bindings generated by
variable abstraction such that `x` would always correspond to the fresh
variable generated by variable abstraction, which is always considered an
acceptable orientation.

Set
---

Set unification proceeds identical to map unification except that we treat each
set element as a map element from its value to ().

List
----

If both terms are function symbols of list sort, we consider 5 cases:

1. If one list is `_List_(l1, Var1)` and the other list is `_List_(l2, Var2)`, where l1 and l2 have no opaque terms, and len(l1) <= len(l2), for i = 1 to len(l1), decompose with the ith element of l1 and l2. Then, remove len(l1) elements from the start of l2 and decompose with Var1 and `_List_(l2, Var2)`
2. If one list is `_List_(Var1, l1)` and the other list is `_List_(Var2, l2)`, where l1 and l2 have no opaque terms, and len(l1) <= len(l2), for i = 1 to len(l1), decompose with the ith element of l1 and the len(l2) - len(l1) + ith element of l2. Then, remove len(l1) elements from the end of l2 and decompose with Var1 and `_List_(Var2, l2)`
3. If both lists have no opaque terms, and they have the same length, unify each element in sequence. If they have different lengths, fail.
4. If one list l1 has no opaque terms and the other is `_List_(l2, Var)`, and len(l2) <= len(l1), then for i = 1 to len(
l2), decompose with the ith element of l1 and l2. Then, remove len(l2) elements from the start of l1 and decompose with Var and l1. If len(l2) > len(l1), fail.
4. If one list l1 has no opaque terms and the other is `_List_(Var, l2)`, and len(l2) <= len(l1), then for i = 1 to len(l2), decompose with the ith element of l2 and the len(l1) - len(l2) + ith element of l1. Then, remove len(l2) elements from the end of l1 and decompose with Var and l1. If len(l2) > len(l1), fail.
5. Otherwise, add the constraint that the two lists are equal.

#if #then #else #fi
-------------------

This is a case that properly speaking, probably ought to be expressed as a
simplification rule, but historically, it was made to be part of the
unification algorithm and writing it as a rule in K is impossible due to the
current restrictions on parametric productions in K. It is quite
straightforward, however:

If one term is `#if B #then T #else F #fi` for patterns B, T, F, and the other
term is `P`, then we fork with two cases:

1. Decompose with T and P and constrain with `\ceil(\and(B, true))`
2. Decompose with F and P and constrain with `\ceil(\and(B, false))`

Fallback
--------

If no other cases apply to patterns p1 and p2, first we try to substitute the
current substitution into p1 and p2 and simplify under the current
constraints. If the resulting patterns are different from before, we decompose
with the new patterns and constrain with the constraints added by the
simplifier, if any.

If they are the same as before, unification is unable to decompose further, and
falls back on a default case by constraining with the equality of the two
terms.
